.\" Man page for halblddb
.\" Use the following command to view man page:
.\"
.\"  tbl halblddb.1 | nroff -man | less
.\"
.TH HALBLDDB 1 "November 2, 2015"
.SH NAME
halblddb \- The first stage in building a HAL database with Emdros
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBhalblddb\fR [ options ] 
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBhalblddb\fR is the first stage in building a HAL database with
Emdros.  It builds a database from an input text which you supply.
The text must be in iso-8859-1 encoding.

HAL is a method for measuring proximity and word-frequency in a text.
The basic idea is to slide a "sliding window" over the text, then
count how many times a given word-form appears within a given distance
of the word at the front of the window.  This is stored in an m x m
matrix, where m is the number of unique word-forms in the text.

For example, if the word A occurs 1 place before word B, and word B is
currently at the head of a sliding window of width 5, then the matrix'
(B,A) entry will get 4 added to it, since 5-1 = 4.  Similarly, if A
occurs 2 places before B, then the (B,A) entry will get 3 added to it.
The sliding window is "slid" across the text until the text has been
exhausted.

\fBhalblddb\fR initializes and builds a HAL database from a given
text.

Typical usage would be:

halblddb -d mydb -f mytext.txt -o mywordlist.txt

If built to use MySQL or PostgreSQL, then you may need additional
options such as "-u username", "-p password" and "-h hostname".

The next step is to run mqlhal(1).  See the man page of mqlhal for
more information.

.SH OPTIONS
\fBhalblddb\fR supports the following command-line switches:
.TP 6
.BI \-\-help
show help
.TP
.BI \-V\ ,\ \-\-version
show version
.TP
.BI \-b\ ,\ \-\-backend \ backend
set database backend to `backend'. Valid values are: For PostgreSQL:
"p", "pg", "postgres", and "postgresql". For MySQL: "m", "my", and
"mysql". For SQLite 2.X.X: "2", "s", "l", "lt", "sqlite", and
"sqlite2". For SQLite 3.X.X: "3", "s3", "lt3", and "sqlite3".
.TP
.BI \-d\ ,\ \-\-dbname \ dbname 
set database name 
.TP
.BI \-f\ input\ text\ filename
set name of input text file
.TP
.BI \-o\ wordlist\ filename
set name of file where the word list will be stored
.TP
.BI \-h\ ,\ \-\-host \ hostname 
set db back-end hostname to connect to (default is 'localhost') (has no effect on SQLite)
.TP
.BI \-u\ ,\ \-\-user \ user
set database user to connect as (default is 'emdf') (has no effect on SQLite)
.TP
.BI \-p\ ,\ \-\-password \ password
set password to use for the database user.  Has no effect on SQLite,
unless you have an encryption-enabled SQLite, in which case this gets
passed as the key.
.TP
.BI \-n
Don't ignore numbers, but add them on an equal footing with the
non-number words.  By default, numbers are discarded, and thus play no
part in the HAL that is built.  Adding this switch will cause the
program not to discard numbers.



.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.BR 0 " Success"
.TP
.BR 1 " Wrong usage"
.TP
.BR 2 " Connection to backend server could not be established"
.TP
.BR 3 " An exception occurred (the type is printed on stderr)"
.TP
.BR 4 " Could not open file"
.TP
.BR 5 " Database error"
.TP
.BR 6 " Compiler error (error in MQL input)"

.SH AUTHORS
Copyright
.Cr
2005-2006 by Ulrik Petersen (ulrikp@users.sourceforge.net).  Note that
this software is distributed under the GNU GPL.  See the sources for
details.

.SH REFERENCES

Burgess, C., K. Livesay, and K. Lund (1998). "Explorations in Context
Space: Words, Sentences, Discourse", Discourse
Processes, Volume 25, pp. 211 - 257.

See <http://locutus.ucr.edu/abstracts/97-bll-expl.html> from where you
can also download the paper.

Burgess, C. and K. Lund. (1997). "Modelling parsing constraints with
high-dimensional context space." Language and Cognitive Processes,
Volume 12, pp. 1-34.

See <http://citeseer.nj.nec.com/context/398051/0>.

Lund, Kevin and Curt Burgess. (1996) "Producing
high-dimensional semantic spaces from lexical co-occurrence",
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, Volume 28,
number 2, pp. 203--208.

See http://locutus.ucr.edu/abstracts/96-lb-prod.html from where you
can also download the paper.
