.\" Man page for mqldump
.\" Use the following command to view man page:
.\"
.\"  tbl mqldump.1 | nroff -man | less
.\"
.TH MQLDUMP 1 "October 9, 2007"
.SH NAME
mqldump \- A tool to dump Emdros databases in MQL
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBmqldump\fR [ options ] database [object type names...]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBmqldump\fR is a tool to dump (parts of) an Emdros database into an
MQL script.  This MQL script can then later be run through the
\fBmql(1)\fR program to recreate (the dumped parts of) the database.

If one or more object type names are given after the database name,
only those object types are processed in the order given.  Otherwise,
all object types are processed.

If the -o option is given, the output is placed on the file with the
filename given.  Otherwise, the output is dumped to stdout.

Object id_ds are preserved, i.e., when dumping object data, each
CREATE OBJECT statement has a WITH ID_D part.  This makes it possible
to import the MQL script again and preserve things like id_d feature
values that point to other objects.

If the -v or --verbose option is given, a lot of information is
displayed showing the progress of the dump.  When dumping objects,
each emitted dot represents 5000 objects.

.SH OPTIONS
\fBmqldump\fR supports the following command-line switches:
.TP 6
.BI \-\-help
show help
.TP
.BI \-V\ ,\ \-\-version
show version
.TP
.BI \-b\ ,\ \-\-backend \ backend
set database backend to `backend'. Valid values are: For PostgreSQL:
"p", "pg", "postgres", and "postgresql". For MySQL: "m", "my", and
"mysql". For SQLite 2.X.X: "2", "s", "l", "lt", "sqlite", and
"sqlite2". For SQLite 3.X.X: "3", "s3", "lt3", and "sqlite3".
.TP
.BI \-h\ ,\ \-\-host \ hostname 
set db back-end hostname to connect to (default is 'localhost').  Has
no effect on SQLite.
.TP
.BI \-u\ ,\ \-\-user \ user
set database user to connect as (default is 'emdf').  Has no effect on
SQLite.
.TP
.BI \-p\ ,\ \-\-password \ password
set password to use for the database user.  Has no effect on SQLite,
unless you have an encryption-enabled SQLite, in which case this gets
passed as the key.

.TP
.BI \-v\ ,\ \-\-verbose
be verbose
.TP
.BI \-o \ filename
produce output on file rather than stdout
.TP
.BI \-n\ ,\ \-\-no\-create\-db
do not produce CREATE DATABASE and USE DATABASE statements at the beginning
.TP
.BI \-i\ ,\ \-\-no\-create\-info
do not produce meta-data info (same as --no-create-enums
--no-create-object-types)
.TP
.BI \-t\ ,\ \-\-no\-create\-object\-types
do not produce object type meta-data info (i.e., don't produce CREATE
OBJECT TYPE statements)
.TP
.BI \-e\ ,\ \-\-no\-create\-enums
do not produce enumeration (meta-)data info (i.e., don't create
enumerations and enumeration constants by producing CREATE ENUMERATION
statements)
.TP
.BI \-m\ ,\ \-\-no\-create\-monad\-sets
do not produce arbitrary monad sets (i.e., don't create monad sets by 
producing CREATE MONAD SET statements)
.TP
.BI \-d\ ,\ \-\-no\-create\-objects
do not produce object data (i.e., don't produce CREATE OBJECT statements)
.TP
.BI \-\-batch\-create\-objects
use CREATE OBJECTS WITH OBJECT TYPE rather than individual CREATE
OBJECT statements.
.TP
.BI \-\-batch\-size \ number 
issue \fInumber\fR object-creations per CREATE OBJECTS WITH OBJECT
TYPE statement.  Implies \fB\-\-batch\-create\-objects\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-start \ number 
set monad at which dumping should start.  Default is MIN_M (i.e.,
lowest monad in database).
.TP
.BI \-\-end \ number 
set monad at which dumping should end.  Default is MAX_M (i.e.,
highest monad in database).
.TP
.BI \-\-encoding \ encoding
When issuing the CREATE DATABASE statement, pass the 'encoding'
argument in the "USING ENCODING" clause of the CREATE DATABASE
statement.  The default is not to pass any "USING ENCODING" clause.
Valid encodings: 'utf-8' and 'iso-8859-1'.



.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.BR 0 " Success"
.TP
.BR 1 " Wrong usage"
.TP
.BR 2 " Connection to backend server could not be established"
.TP
.BR 3 " An exception occurred (the type is printed on stderr)"
.TP
.BR 4 " Could not open file"
.TP
.BR 5 " Database error"
.TP
.BR 6 " Compiler error (error in MQL input)"
.SH AVAILABILITY
Available from http://emdros.org/.
.SH AUTHORS
Copyright
.Cr
2003-2007 by Ulrik Petersen (ulrikp@users.sourceforge.net).  Note that
this software is distributed under the GNU GPL.  See the sources for
details.
