.\" Man page for mqltry.1
.\" Use the following command to view man page:
.\"
.\"  tbl mqltry.1 | nroff -man | less
.\"
.TH MQLTRY 1 "January 20, 2007"
.SH NAME
mqltry \- A tool to test basic Emdros functionality
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBmqltry\fR [options] 
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBmqltry\fR is a tool for testing basic Emdros functionality.  In
particular, it exercises the MQL layer.  It should run with no errors,
emitting a lot of messages.

If all tests completed successfully, the last line of output will be
"SUCCESS: All tests completed successfully."

If at least one test failed, the last line of output will be "FAILURE:
At least one test failed."

.SH OPTIONS
\fBmqltry\fR supports the following command-line switches:
.TP 6
.BI \-\-help
show help
.TP
.BI \-V\ ,\ \-\-version
show version
.TP
.BI \-b\ ,\ \-\-backend \ backend
set database backend to `backend'. Valid values are: For PostgreSQL:
"p", "pg", "postgres", and "postgresql". For MySQL: "m", "my", and
"mysql". For SQLite 2.X.X: "2", "s", "l", "lt", "sqlite", and
"sqlite2". For SQLite 3.X.X: "3", "s3", "lt3", and "sqlite3".
.TP
.BI \-u\ ,\ \-\-user \ user
set database user to connect as (default is 'emdf').  Has no effect on
SQLite.
.TP
.BI \-p\ ,\ \-\-password \ password
set password to use for the database user.  Has no effect on SQLite,
unless you have an encryption-enabled SQLite, in which case this gets
passed as the key.




.SH AUTHORS
Copyright
.Cr
2001-2006 by Ulrik Petersen (ulrikp@users.sourceforge.net).  Note that
this software is distributed under the GNU GPL.  See the sources for
details.
