.\" Man page for renderobjects
.\" Use the following command to view man page:
.\"
.\"  tbl renderobjects.1 | nroff -man | less
.\"
.TH RENDEROBJECTS 1 "January 13, 2009"
.SH NAME
renderobjects \- A tool to render part of an Emdros database as a document
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBrenderobjects\fR [ options ] stylesheet-filename database-name
.br
\fBrenderobjects\fR (--help|--version|-V)
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBrenderobjects\fR is a tool to render a part of an Emdros database
as a document.  It uses the "RenderObjects" module and/or the
"RenderXML" module, described in the Emdros Programmer's Reference
Guide.  Please see that document for more information on the
stylesheet language and method used.

.SH OPTIONS
\fBrenderobjects\fR supports the following command-line switches:
.TP 6
.BI \-\-help
show help
.TP
.BI \-V\ ,\ \-\-version
show version
.TP
.BI \-\-fm \ first_monad
first monad to use
.TP
.BI \-\-lm \ last_monad
last monad to use
.TP
.BI \-\-renderxml
render the XML from the objects; don't stop after rendering the objects
.TP
.BI \-o\ ,\ \-\-output \ output-filename
name of output file; if "-" or absent, use stdout
.TP
.BI \-s\ ,\ \-\-stylesheet \ stylesheet-name
name of stylesheet to use.  If --renderxml has been given, this is the
stylesheet inside the "renderinfo" part of the stylesheet to use.  In
this case, the "fetchinfo" stylesheet is given by the
"fetch_stylesheet" entry in the "renderinfo" stylesheet.  If
--renderxml has not been given, this is the stylsheet inside the
"fetchinfo" part of the stylesheet to be read.  The filename of the
stylesheet to be read is specified as the first non-option argument on
the command line.
.TP
.BI \-h\ ,\ \-\-host \ hostname 
set db back-end hostname to connect to (default is 'localhost').  Has
no effect on SQLite.
.TP
.BI \-u\ ,\ \-\-user \ user
set database user to connect as (default is 'emdf').  Has no effect on
SQLite.
.TP
.BI \-p\ ,\ \-\-password \ password
set password to use for the database user.  Has no effect on SQLite,
unless you have an encryption-enabled SQLite, in which case this gets
passed as the key.
.TP
.BI \-b\ ,\ \-\-backend \ backend
set database backend to `backend'. Valid values are: For PostgreSQL:
"p", "pg", "postgres", and "postgresql". For MySQL: "m", "my", and
"mysql". For SQLite 2.X.X: "2", "s", "l", "lt", "sqlite", and
"sqlite2". For SQLite 3.X.X: "3", "s3", "lt3", and "sqlite3".
.TP


.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.BR 0 " Success"
.TP
.BR 1 " Wrong usage"
.TP
.BR 2 " Connection to backend server could not be established"
.TP
.BR 3 " An exception occurred (the type is printed on stderr)"
.TP
.BR 4 " Could not open file"
.SH AUTHORS
Written Ulrik Sandborg-Petersen (ulrikp@emdros.org).
