.\" Man page for upgrade_db.1
.\" Use the following command to view man page:
.\"
.\"  tbl upgrade_db.1 | nroff -man | less
.\"
.TH UPGRADE_DB 1 "January 20, 2007"
.SH NAME
upgrade_db \- A tool to upgrade Emdros databases
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBupgrade_db\fR [options] database-name
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBupgrade_db\fR is a tool for upgrading Emdros databases created with
Emdros version 1.1.7 or earlier to databases that work with Emdros
version 1.1.8 and later.

.br
For databases created with Emdros prior to version 1.1.0, the program
does the following: For each object type OT in the database, it:

1) Adds a new column, \fIis_first\fR, to the \fIOT_monad_ms\fR table.

2) Adds some indices on \fIOT_monad_ms\fR and \fIOT_objects\fR (see EMdFDB::createIndicesOnOTObjects and 
EMdFDB::CreateIndicesOnOTMonadMs).

3) If using PostgreSQL, sets all \fIis_first\fR values in \fIOT_monad_ms\fR to 'N'.

4) Finds out which \fIis_first\fR values should be set to 'Y'.

5) Sets these to 'Y'.  Each dot represents 500 rows.

6) Drops table \fIOT_monad_ds\fR.

After having dealt with all object types, the program creates two new
tables, `sequence_0' and `sequence_1', and moves the values from the
old `sequences' table into these new tables.  It then drops the old
`sequences' table.

For databases created with Emdros versions 1.1.0 to 1.1.4, the program
does the following:

1) Creates the table \fImax_m\fR

2) Sets the values in this table to the maximum monad found in the
database.

For databases created with Emdros versions 1.1.5 to 1.1.7, the program
does the following:

1) Creates the tables/sequences \fIsequence_118_0\fR and
\fIsequence_118_1\fR (tables on MySQL, sequences on PostgreSQL).

2) Moves the values from the old \fIsequence_0\fR and \fIsequence_1\fR
tables to the new tables/sequences.

3) Drops the old \fIsequence_0\fR and \fIsequence_1\fR tables.

See the source in EMdF/emdfdb.cpp:EMdFDB::upgradeDatabase for the full
story.

.SH OPTIONS
\fBupgrade_db\fR supports the following command-line switches:
.TP 6
.BI \-\-help
show help
.TP
.BI \-V\ ,\ \-\-version
show version
.TP
.BI \-h\ ,\ \-\-host \ hostname 
set db back-end hostname to connect to (default is 'localhost'). Has
no effect on SQLite.
.TP
.BI \-u\ ,\ \-\-user \ user
set database user to connect as (default is 'emdf'). Has no effect on
SQLite.
.TP
.BI \-p\ ,\ \-\-password \ password
set password to use for the database user.  Has no effect on SQLite,
unless you have an encryption-enabled SQLite, in which case this gets
passed as the key.
.TP
.BI \-b\ ,\ \-\-backend \ backend
set database backend to `backend'. Valid values are: For PostgreSQL:
"p", "pg", "postgres", and "postgresql". For MySQL: "m", "my", and
"mysql". For SQLite 2.X.X: "2", "s", "l", "lt", "sqlite", and
"sqlite2". For SQLite 3.X.X: "3", "s3", "lt3", and "sqlite3".




.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.BR 0 " Success"
.TP
.BR 1 " Wrong usage"
.TP
.BR 2 " Connection to backend server could not be established"
.TP
.BR 3 " An exception occurred (the type is printed on stderr)"
.TP
.BR 4 " Could not upgrade"
.TP
.BR 5 " Database error"
.SH AUTHORS
Written Ulrik Sandborg-Petersen (ulrikp@emdros.org).
