.\" Man page for bptdump
.\" Use the following command to view man page:
.\"
.\"  tbl bptdump.1 | nroff -man | less
.\"
.TH BPTDUMP 1 "May 2, 2017"
.SH NAME
bptdump \- A utility to dump an Emdros database as a Bit Packed Table
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBbptdump\fR [ options ] -d database-to-dump bptfilename
.br
\fBbptdump\fR [ options ] 
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBbptdump\fR is a utility to dump an Emdros database created with one
of the "other" backends as a BPT (Bit Packed Table) database, suitable
for the BPT engine.
.TP
The BPT engine is a lightweight backend database engine that is
tailored to the EMdF model which Emdros implements.  It is much faster
than the other backends, and creates databases that are smaller than
the other backends.  It is proprietary, not Open Source.
.TP
Please contact Ulrik Sandborg-Petersen, the author of Emdros, for more
information about the BPT engine, including licensing options.  You
may reach him via: <ulrikp{at}scripturesys[dot]com> (address obfuscated to
avoid spammers; sorry to everyone else...).
.TP
In the Open Source version of Emdros, the \fBbptdump\fR utility does
nothing beyond report an error.  The program only does something
useful in the proprietary version.
.TP
The BPT engine has the ability to have, within the same file, two BPT
databases: One which is the "main" database, and one which is a
"payload", i.e., a compressed version of a secondary database.  The
payload cannot be read as part of the main database, but it can be
dumped into another file, using on-the-fly encryption if need be,
using the method BPTEMdFDB::dumpPayload().

.SH OPTIONS
\fBbptdump\fR supports the following command-line switches:
.TP 6
.BI \-\-help
show help
.TP
.BI \-V\ ,\ \-\-version
show version
.TP
.BI \-d\ ,\ \-\-dbname \ dbname 
set name of the database to dump.  
.TP
.BI \--key\ key
set the key with which to encrypt the BPT database
.TP
.BI \-pd\ ,\ \-\-payload\-db \ dbname 
set name of any payload database to compress and add to the end
.TP
.BI \-pk\ ,\ \-\⨪payload\-key \ key
set the key with which to decrypt the payload before compressing
.TP
.BI \--schema\ (1|3)
Use the specified BPT schema. Schema version 1 is a row-store. Schema
version 3 is a column-store. The default is 3. Version 2 of the schema
is a variant of version 1, and is used automatically. It is only used
if the database to be dumped has at least one feature whose type is
SET OF MONADS. It is not possible to specify that version 2 must be
used.
.TP
.BI \-h\ ,\ \-\-host \ hostname 
set db back-end hostname to connect to (default is 'localhost').  Has
no effect on SQLite3.
.TP
.BI \-u\ ,\ \-\-user \ user
set database user to connect as (default is 'emdf').  Has no effect on
SQLite3.
.TP
.BI \-p\ ,\ \-\-password \ password
set password to use for the database user.  Has no effect on SQLite3,
unless you have an encryption-enabled SQLite3, in which case this gets
passed as the key.
.TP
.BI \-b\ ,\ \-\-backend \ backend
set database backend to `backend'. Valid values are: For PostgreSQL:
"p", "pg", "postgres", and "postgresql". For MySQL: "m", "my", and
"mysql". For SQLite 3.X.X: "3", "s3", "lt3", and "sqlite3".

.SH EXAMPLES

The following would dump a PostgreSQL database (-b p) with the
PostgreSQL username "mike", mike's password being "sicrit", from the
host "other.host.mydomain.net", and dumping the PostgreSQL database
mydbtodump into the BPT file /home/mike/bptoutputfilename.
.TP
bptdump -b p -u mike -p sicrit -h other.host.mydomain.net -d mydbtodump /home/mike/bptoutputfilename
.TP
Another example, this time dumping an SQLite 3 database called
"/home/mike/db/mydbtodump", and dumping it into /home/mike/db/bptdb.
.TP
bptdump -b 3 -d /home/mike/db/mydbtodump /home/mike/db/bptdb


.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.BR 0 " Success"
.TP
.BR 1 " Wrong usage"
.TP
.BR 2 " Connection to backend server could not be established"
.TP
.BR 3 " An exception occurred (the type is printed on stderr)"
.TP
.BR 4 " Something else went wrong."
.TP
.SH AUTHORS
Copyright
.Cr
2001-2017 by Ulrik Sandborg-Petersen (ulrikp@emdros.org). All rights reserved.
