.\" Man page for emdftry.1
.\" Use the following command to view man page:
.\"
.\"  tbl emdftry.1 | nroff -man | less
.\"
.TH EMDFTRY 1 "September 23, 2006"
.SH NAME
emdftry \- A tool to test basic Emdros functionality
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBemdftry\fR [options] 
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBemdftry\fR is a tool for testing basic Emdros functionality.  In
particular, it exercises the EMdF layer.  It should run with no
errors, emitting a lot of messages.  Most of them will start with the
word SUCCESS.  If any error occurs, a FAILURE message will appear, and
the program will not run any further tests.

If all tests completed successfully, the last line of output will be
"SUCCESS: All tests completed successfully."

If at least one test failed, the last line of output will be "FAILURE:
At least one test failed."


.SH OPTIONS
\fBemdftry\fR supports the following command-line switches:
.TP 6
.BI \-\-help
show help
.TP
.BI \-V\ ,\ \-\-version
show version
.TP
.BI \-b\ ,\ \-\-backend \ backend
set database backend to `backend'. Valid values are: For PostgreSQL:
"p", "pg", "postgres", and "postgresql". For MySQL: "m", "my", and
"mysql". For SQLite 2.X.X: "s", "l", "lt", "sqlite", and
"sqlite2". For SQLite 3.X.X: "3", "s3", "lt3", and "sqlite3".
.TP
.BI \-h\ ,\ \-\-host \ hostname 
set db back-end hostname to connect to (default is 'localhost')
.TP
.BI \-u\ ,\ \-\-user \ user
set database user to connect as (default is 'emdf')
.TP
.BI \-p\ ,\ \-\-password \ password
set password to use for the database user



.SH AUTHORS
Written Ulrik Sandborg-Petersen (ulrikp@emdros.org).
