.\" Man page for fts_indexer
.\" Use the following command to view man page:
.\"
.\"  tbl fts_indexer.1 | nroff -man | less
.\"
.TH FTS_INDEXER 1 "December 28, 2013"
.SH NAME
fts_indexer \- A tool to index Emdros databases for Full Text Search
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBfts_indexer\fR [ options ] [filters]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBfts_indexer\fR is a command-line tool to prepare an Emdros database
for Full Text Search using the techniques of the fts_search tool (or
the libharvest library).

The \fBfts_indexer\fR tool needs a source database to read from, an
optional target database to write to (which by default is the same as
the source database), and an optional output file name to (also) dump
the MQL to.

The program also needs a "bookcase object type", which must consist of
objects that are somehow "larger" than the "indexed object type".
That is, the "indexed object type" (for example, "Word") must have
objects which are wholly contained within the "bookcase object type"
(for example, "document").  In effect, the "bookcase object type"
provides the frames of monads within which to index the "indexed
object type".  In addition, the "indexed object type" must have a
concomitant "indexed feature", which is the feature on which to index.
For example, "surface" could be a feature on "Word" which could be
ideal to index on.

The program will issue a series of "CREATE OBJECT TYPE" and "CREATE
OBJECTS WITH OBJECT TYPE" statements on the target database.
Optionally, with the --nodb switch, one can skip the actual creation
of the data in the database.  This is usually used with the -o switch,
which dumps the MQL statements to a file.  It is possible both to dump
the MQL statements to a file, and to create the data in the database
on-the-fly at the same time.


.SH OPTIONS
\fBfts_indexer\fR supports the following command-line switches:
.TP 6
.BI \-\-help
show help
.TP
.BI \-V\ ,\ \-\-version
show version
.TP
.BI \-fe\ ,\ \-\-fts\-engine \ fts\-engine\-version
Use the given version of the FTS engine. Currently, versions 1 and 2
are supported. Version 1 is the current default.
.TP
.BI \-\-nodb
Do not create objects or object types in the target database.  In
fact, do not connect to the target database at all for creation of
objects or object types.
.TP
.BI \-\-no\-vacuum
Do not emit a VACUUM DATABASE ANLYZE GO statement at the end of the
indexing.  This can be useful if more than one invocation is needed on
a particular database, and one intends to run VACUUM DATABASE ANALYZE
only on the last invocation.  This can save some time otherwise
wasted.
.TP
.BI \-d\ ,\ \-\-dbname \ dbname 
set database from which to read, and to which to write (unless -td or
--nodb is given).
.TP
.BI \-td\ ,\ \-\-target-dbname \ dbname 
set target database to which to write.  Normally, the target database
name is the same as the source database, but this switch allows you to
override that behavior and choose another database.  The database
should exist.
.TP
.BI \-\-bookcase\-otn \ object\-type\-name
Use object-type-name as the object type which surrounds the "indexed
object type".
.TP
.BI \-\-indexed\-otn \ object\-type\-name
Use object-type-name as the object type which must be indexed.
.TP
.BI \-\-indexed\-feature \ feature\-name\[, ...]
Use feature-names in the comma-separated list as the feature(s) on the
indexed object type for which to generate the index.  That is, if the
indexed object type is, for example, "Word", then the indexed feature
could be "surface", and then "Word" must have a feature called
"surface".  Alternatively, the feature-name list could be
"surface,stemmed_surface", meaning that the two features "surface" and
"stemmed_surface" would both be indexed in the same index.
.TP
.BI \-o\ ,\ \-\-output \ filename
dump MQL statements to file filename. If this switch is not given,
then the MQL is just executed within the target database.
.TP
.BI \-h\ ,\ \-\-host \ hostname 
set source db back-end hostname to connect to (default
is 'localhost').  Has no effect on SQLite or SQLite 3.  If --nodb is
not given, and if -th or --target-host is not given, then the target
database host will be the same as the source database host.
.TP
.BI \-th\ ,\ \-\-target\-host \ hostname 
set target db back-end hostname to connect to (default
is 'localhost').  Has no effect on SQLite or SQLite 3.  Has no effect
it --nodb is given.  If -th and --target-host are not given, then the
target database host will be the same as the source database host.
.TP
.BI \-u\ ,\ \-\-user \ user
set source database user to connect as (default is 'emdf').  Has no
effect on SQLite or SQLite 3.  Will be used for the target database
user as well, unless --nodb, -tu, or --target-user is given.
.TP
.BI \-tu\ ,\ \-\-target\-user \ user
set target database user to connect as (default is 'emdf').  Has no
effect on SQLite or SQLite 3.  Will override the source database user
if given.  Has no effect if --nodb is given.
.TP
.BI \-p\ ,\ \-\-password \ password
set source database password to use for the source database user.  Has
no effect on SQLite or SQLite 3, unless you have an encryption-enabled
SQLite (3), in which case this gets passed as the key.  Will be used
for the target database password, unless one of --nodb, -tp or
--target-password is given.
.TP
.BI \-tp\ ,\ \-\-target\-password \ password
set target password to use for the target database user.  Has no
effect on SQLite (3), unless you have an encryption-enabled SQLite
(3), in which case this gets passed as the key.  Will override the
source database user for the target database.  Has no effect if --nodb
is given.
.BI \-b\ ,\ \-\-backend \ backend
set source database backend to `backend'. The target database backend
is also given with this switch, unless provided by the -tb switch.
Valid values are: For PostgreSQL: "p", "pg", "postgres", and
"postgresql". For MySQL: "m", "my", and "mysql". For SQLite 2.X.X:
"2", "s", "l", "lt", "sqlite", and "sqlite2". For SQLite 3.X.X: "3",
"s3", "lt3", and "sqlite3".
.TP
.BI \-tb\ ,\ \-\-target\-backend \ backend
set target database backend to `backend'. The target database backend
is usually the same as the source database backend, but this switch
makes it possible to use another database backend for the
target. Valid values are the same as for -b.
.TP
.BI \-sf\ ,\ \-\-stylesheet-filename \ stylesheet-filename
Gives the name of the file containing the JSON stylesheet to use. See
the man-page fts_filters(5) to learn the syntax of that file.

This option must be used in conjunction with the -s option.  If it is
used, you cannot also use filters at the end of the command line.
.TP
.BI \-s\ ,\ \-\-stylesheet \ stylesheet-name
This option tells the program which stylesheet within the stylesheet
file provided with the -sf option must be used.

This option must be used in conjunction with the -sf option.  If it is
used, you cannot also use filters at the end of the command line. 

.SH FILTERS
After the last option, you have the possibility to specify any number
of filters through which the indexed feature string must be passed
before being stored.

Some filters take an argument, in which case the argument must come
directly after the filter name, separated by whitespace on the command
line.

You cannot use both filters on the command line and the -s and -sf
options.

The following filters are available:

.TP 6
.BI strip\-whitespace
Takes no parameter; just strips whitespace from either end of the
string.
.TP
.BI strip\-chars \ chars\-to\-strip
Takes 1 parameter; strips all characters in the parameter from either
end of the string.
.TP
.BI lowercase
Takes no parameter; makes the string lower-case. Only works with ASCII
letters.
.TP
.BI uppercase
Takes no parameter; makes the string upper-case. Only works with ASCII
letters.

For example, the following chain:

strip-whitespace lowercase strip-chars '.,;:?!'

will first strip whitespace from either end, then make all ASCII
letters lower-case, then strip any of the punctuation chars '.,;:?!'
from either end of the string.


.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.BR 0 " Success"
.TP
.BR 1 " Wrong usage"
.TP
.BR 2 " Connection to backend server could not be established"
.TP
.BR 3 " An exception occurred (the type is printed on stderr)"
.TP
.BR 4 " Could not open file"
.TP
.BR 5 " Database error"
.TP
.BR 6 " Compiler error (internal error)
.SH AUTHORS
Written Ulrik Sandborg-Petersen (ulrikp@emdros.org).
