.\" Man page for fts_harvester
.\" Use the following command to view man page:
.\"
.\"  tbl fts_harvester.1 | nroff -man | less
.\"
.TH FTS_HARVESTER 1 "May 2, 2017"
.SH NAME
fts_harvester \- A tool to harvest Emdros databases with Full Text Search
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBfts_harvester\fR [ options ] <query-terms...>
.br
\fBfts_harvester\fR <--help|-V|--version>
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBfts_harvester\fR is a command-line tool to harvest an Emdros
database that has been prepared for Full Text Search by fts_indexer(1)
or via the libharvest library.

The \fBfts_harvester\fR tool needs a source database to read from, and
at least one query term.

The program also needs a "bookcase object type", which must consist of
objects that are somehow "larger" than the "indexed object type". (In
Information Retrieval terms, the "bookcase_object_type" is the
"document".)  That is, the "indexed object type" (for example, "Word")
must have objects which are wholly contained within the "bookcase
object type" (for example, "document").  In effect, the "bookcase
object type" provides the frames of monads within which to index the
"indexed object type". In addition, the "indexed object type" must
have a concomitant "indexed feature", which is the feature on which to
index.  For example, "surface" could be a feature on "Word" which
could be ideal to index on.

The output of the program is either plain text or XHTML snippets (if
the --xhtml option is given).

The program can optionally show titles, taken from a "bookcase title
object type" having a "bookcase title feature".  If, for example,
there is an object type called "part", having a feature "part_name",
then the former can be given as the bookcase title object type (using
the option "--bookcase-title-otn"), and the feature "part" can be
given as the boookcase title feature (using the option
"--bookcase-title-feature").


.SH OPTIONS
\fBfts_harvester\fR supports the following command-line switches:
.TP 6
.BI \-\-help
show help
.TP
.BI \-V\ ,\ \-\-version
show version
.TP
.BI \-fe\ ,\ \-\-fts\-engine \ fts\-engine\-version
Use the given version of the FTS engine. Currently, versions 1 and 2
are supported. Version 1 is the current default.
.TP
.BI \-g\ ,\ \-\-google-syntax
If given, each query term, if surrounded by "double quotes", is
interpreted as a series of terms which must appear in (monad) sequence
right after each other.  Example: \fB-g '"the prime minister"'\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-xhtml
If given, XHTML snippets are emitted.  The XHTML preamble and the
ending </body></html> snippet are not emitted.
.TP
.BI \-d\ ,\ \-\-dbname \ dbname 
set database from which to read, and to which to write (unless -td or
--nodb is given).
.TP
.BI \-lp\ ,\ \-\-largest-proximity \ integer
Use this number as the largest proximity (in monads) to allow between
query terms (within the boundaries of each object in the bookcase
object type).
.TP
.BI \-\-bookcase\-otn \ object\-type\-name
Use object-type-name as the object type which surrounds the "indexed
object type".
.TP
.BI \-\-indexed\-otn \ object\-type\-name
Use object-type-name as the object type which must be indexed.
.TP
.BI \-\-indexed\-feature \ feature\-name
Use feature-name as the feature on the indexed object type for which
to generate the index.  That is, if the indexed object type is, for
example, "Word", then the indexed feature could be "surface", and then
"Word" must have a feature called "surface".
.TP
.BI \-\-bookcase\-title\-otn \ object\-type\-name
Use object-type-name as the object type from which to get a title for
each hit.
.BI \-btf\ ,\ \-\-bookcase\-title\-feature \ feature\-name
Use feature-name as the feature on the bookcase title object type from
which to get a title for each hit.  For example, if there is an object
type callled "part", with a feature called "name", then "name" might
be given here, and "part" might be given for --bookcase-title-otn.
.TP
.BI \-o\ ,\ \-\-output \ filename
dump MQL statements to file filename. If this switch is not given,
then the MQL is just executed within the target database.
.TP
.BI \-h\ ,\ \-\-host \ hostname 
set source db back-end hostname to connect to (default
is 'localhost').  Has no effect on SQLite.  If --nodb is
not given, and if -th or --target-host is not given, then the target
database host will be the same as the source database host.
.TP
.BI \-u\ ,\ \-\-user \ user
set source database user to connect as (default is 'emdf').  Has no
effect on SQLite.  Will be used for the target database
user as well, unless --nodb, -tu, or --target-user is given.
.TP
.BI \-p\ ,\ \-\-password \ password
set source database password to use for the source database user.  Has
no effect on SQLite, unless you have an encryption-enabled
SQLite, in which case this gets passed as the key.  Will be used
for the target database password, unless one of --nodb, -tp or
--target-password is given.
.TP
.BI \-b\ ,\ \-\-backend \ backend
set source database backend to `backend'. The target database backend
is also given with this switch, unless provided by the -tb switch.
Valid values are: For PostgreSQL: "p", "pg", "postgres", and
"postgresql". For MySQL: "m", "my", and "mysql". For SQLite 3.X.X:
"3", "s3", "lt3", and "sqlite3".
.TP
.BI \-page\ ,\ \-\-page \ page-number
In XHTML mode, gives the page to start at (first page == 1). If < 1,
all results are returned. Defaults to -1, so all results are displayed
by default.
.TP
.BI \-hpp\ ,\ \-\-hits-per-page \ max-number-of-hits-per-page
Sets the maximum number of hits per page. Defaults to 10.
.TP
.BI \-sf\ ,\ \-\-stylesheet-filename \ stylesheet-filename
Gives the name of the file containing the JSON stylesheet to use. See
the man-page fts_filters(5) to learn the syntax of that file.

This option must be used in conjunction with the -s option.  If it is
used, you cannot also use filters at the end of the command line.
.TP
.BI \-s\ ,\ \-\-stylesheet \ stylesheet-name
This option tells the program which stylesheet within the stylesheet
file provided with the -sf option must be used.

This option must be used in conjunction with the -sf option.

.SH FILTERS
See fts_filters(5) for a discussion of filters.  See the options -sf
and -s for how to use them.

.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.BR 0 " Success"
.TP
.BR 1 " Wrong usage"
.TP
.BR 2 " Connection to backend server could not be established"
.TP
.BR 3 " An exception occurred (the type is printed on stderr)"
.TP
.BR 4 " Could not open file"
.TP
.BR 5 " Database error"
.TP
.BR 6 " Compiler error (internal error)
.SH AUTHORS
Copyright
.Cr
2010-2011 by Ulrik Sandborg-Petersen (ulrikp@users.sourceforge.net).
Note that this software is distributed under the GNU GPL.  See the
sources for details.
