.\" Man page for jsontry.1
.\" Use the following command to view man page:
.\"
.\"  tbl jsontry.1 | nroff -man | less
.\"
.TH JSONTRY 1 "June 18, 2016"
.SH NAME
jsontry \- A tool to test JSON parsing in Emdros
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBjsontry\fR [-d|-c|-u] json-filename
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBjsontry\fR is a tool for testing the JSON parser in Emdros.  It
takes one argument, namely a filename.  The file is opened and read,
and parsed with the JSON parser embedded in Emdros.  If an error
occurs, the particulars of the error are written to stderr, the word
"FAILURE" is written to stderr, and 2 is returned.  If no parsing
error occurs, the JSON is pretty-printed on stdout, the word
"SUCCESS" is printed on stderr, and 0 is returned.

.SH OPTIONS
\fBjsontry\fR supports the following command-line switches:
.TP 6
.BI \-d
For debugging: Upon parsing failure, print the input consumed by the
lexer up until the syntax error occurred.  The output is printed on
stderr, just before the error message given by the parser is printed
on stderr.  Note that the lexer may have consumed the input further
than the point at which the syntax error occurred.
.TP 6
.BI \-c
For minifying: Upon parsing success, prints the result as compacted,
i.e., minified JSON.  Implies -d.
.BI \-u
For Unicode-escaping: Upon parsing success, prints the result as
compacted, i.e., minified JSON, which is also Unicode-escaped with
\\uxxxxxx for Unicode code points above 0x7F.  Assumes the input is
UTF-8 encoded.  Implies -d.

.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.BR 0 " Success"
.TP
.BR 1 " Wrong usage"
.TP
.BR 2 " Error in parsing the JSON input"

.SH AUTHORS
Written Ulrik Sandborg-Petersen (ulrikp@emdros.org).
