.\" Man page for manage_indices.1
.\" Use the following command to view man page:
.\"
.\"  tbl manage_indices.1 | nroff -man | less
.\"
.TH MANAGE_INDICES 1 "January 20, 2007"
.SH NAME
manage_indices \- A tool to manage indices on Emdros databases
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBmanage_indices\fR --create [options] database-name
.br
\fBmanage_indices\fR --drop [options] database-name
.br
\fBmanage_indices\fR --help
.br
\fBmanage_indices\fR (-V|--version)
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBmanage_indices\fR is a tool for creating and dropping indices on an
Emdros database's object types.  If the option "--type
object-type-name" is given, only that object type is affected.  If
this option is not given, all object types in the database are
affected.
.SH OPTIONS
\fBmanage_indices\fR supports the following command-line switches:
.TP 6
.BI \-\-help
show help
.TP
.BI \-V\ ,\ \-\-version
show version
.TP
.BI \-\-create
indices are created
.TP
.BI \-\-drop
indices are dropped
.TP
.TP
.BI \-b\ ,\ \-\-backend \ backend
set database backend to `backend'. Valid values are: For PostgreSQL:
"p", "pg", "postgres", and "postgresql". For MySQL: "m", "my", and
"mysql". For SQLite 2.X.X: "2", "s", "l", "lt", "sqlite", and
"sqlite2". For SQLite 3.X.X: "3", "s3", "lt3", and "sqlite3".
.BI \-t\ ,\ \-\-type " object-type-name"
only the object type \fIobject-type-name\fR is affected
.TP
.BI \-h\ ,\ \-\-host \ hostname 
set db back-end hostname to connect to (default is 'localhost').  Has
no effect on SQLite.
.TP
.BI \-u\ ,\ \-\-user \ user
set database user to connect as (default is 'emdf').  Has no effect on
SQLite.
.TP
.BI \-p\ ,\ \-\-password \ password
set password to use for the database user.  Has no effect on SQLite,
unless you have an encryption-enabled SQLite, in which case this gets
passed as the key.


.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.BR 0 " Success"
.TP
.BR 1 " Wrong usage"
.TP
.BR 2 " Connection to backend server could not be established"
.TP
.BR 3 " An exception occurred (the type is printed on stderr)"
.TP
.BR 5 " Database error"
.SH AUTHORS
Copyright
.Cr
2001-2006 by Ulrik Petersen (ulrikp@users.sourceforge.net).  Note that
this software is distributed under the GNU GPL.  See the sources for
details.
