.\" Man page for mql
.\" Use the following command to view man page:
.\"
.\"  tbl mql.1 | nroff -man | less
.\"
.TH MQL 1 "July 24, 2013"
.SH NAME
mql \- A front-end to the Emdros engine using the MQL query language
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBmql\fR [ options ] filename
.br
\fBmql\fR [ options ] 
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBmql\fR is a front-end to Emdros using the MQL query language.  If a
filename is given on the command-line, the contents of that file are
piped through the MQL engine.  If no filename is given on the
command-line, stdin is used to get the MQL input.  The output is given
on stdout, or on stderr if unsuccessful.

.SH OPTIONS
\fBmql\fR supports the following command-line switches:
.TP 6
.BI \-\-help
show help
.TP
.BI \-V\ ,\ \-\-version
show version
.TP
.BI \-\-xml\ 
output-format is XML
.TP
.BI \-\-cxml\ 
output-format is compact XML
.TP
.BI \-\-console
output-format is console (this is the default)
.TP
.BI \-\-incomplete-output
the caller is prepared to expect incomplete output.  The tradeoff is
that, with this option, we gain some speed due to flushing the output
buffer all the time being unnecessary.
.TP
.BI \-d\ ,\ \-\-dbname \ dbname 
set initial dbname (default is 'emdf')
.TP
.BI \-h\ ,\ \-\-host \ hostname 
set db back-end hostname to connect to (default is 'localhost').  Has
no effect on SQLite.
.TP
.BI \-u\ ,\ \-\-user \ user
set database user to connect as (default is 'emdf').  Has no effect on
SQLite.
.TP
.BI \-p\ ,\ \-\-password \ password
set password to use for the database user.  Has no effect on SQLite,
unless you have an encryption-enabled SQLite, in which case this gets
passed as the key.
.TP
.BI \-b\ ,\ \-\-backend \ backend
set database backend to `backend'. Valid values are: For PostgreSQL:
"p", "pg", "postgres", and "postgresql". For MySQL: "m", "my", and
"mysql". For SQLite 2.X.X: "2", "s", "l", "lt", "sqlite", and
"sqlite2". For SQLite 3.X.X: "3", "s3", "lt3", and "sqlite3".
.TP
.BI \-n\ ,\ \-\-nop 
do not print results (no output)


.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.BR 0 " Success"
.TP
.BR 1 " Wrong usage"
.TP
.BR 2 " Connection to backend server could not be established"
.TP
.BR 3 " An exception occurred (the type is printed on stderr)"
.TP
.BR 4 " Could not open file"
.TP
.BR 5 " Database error"
.TP
.BR 6 " Compiler error (error in MQL input)"
.SH AUTHORS
Copyright
.Cr
2001-2003 by Ulrik Petersen (ulrikp@users.sourceforge.net).  Note that
this software is distributed under the GNU GPL.  See the sources for
details.
