.\" Man page for mqltry.1
.\" Use the following command to view man page:
.\"
.\"  tbl mqllingtry.1 | nroff -man | less
.\"
.TH MQLLINGTRY 1 "May 2, 2017"
.SH NAME
mqllingtry \- A tool to test basic Emdros functionality linguistically
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBmqllingtry\fR [options] 
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION

\fBmqllingtry\fR is a tool for testing basic Emdros functionality.  In
particular, it exercises the MQL layer through imitating a real
linguistic application using Emdros.  It should run with no errors,
emitting a lot of messages.

.SH OPTIONS
\fBmqllingtry\fR supports the following command-line switches:
.TP 6
.BI \-\-help
show help
.TP
.BI \-V\ ,\ \-\-version
show version
.TP
.BI \-b\ ,\ \-\-backend \ backend
set database backend to `backend'. Valid values are: For PostgreSQL:
"p", "pg", "postgres", and "postgresql". For MySQL: "m", "my", and
"mysql". For SQLite 3.X.X: "3", "s3", "lt3", and "sqlite3".
.TP
.BI \-h\ ,\ \-\-host \ hostname 
set db back-end hostname to connect to (default is 'localhost').  Has
no effect on SQLite.
.TP
.BI \-u\ ,\ \-\-user \ user
set database user to connect as (default is 'emdf').  Has no effect on
SQLite.
.TP
.BI \-p\ ,\ \-\-password \ password
set password to use for the database user. Has no effect on SQLite,
unless you have an encryption-enabled SQLite, in which case this gets
passed as the key.




.SH AUTHORS
Copyright
.Cr
2005-2017 by Ulrik Sandborg-Petersen (ulrikp@emdros.org).  Note that
this software is distributed under the GNU GPL.  See the sources for
details.
