.\" Man page for pennimport
.\" Use the following command to view man page:
.\"
.\"  tbl pennimport.1 | nroff -man | less
.\"
.TH PENNIMPORT 1 "December 31, 2013"
.SH NAME
pennimport \- A tool to convert Penn Treebank format to Emdros MQL
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBpennimport\fR [ options ] [input_filename ...]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBpennimport\fR is a command-line tool to convert Penn Treebank
format to Emdros MQL for later importing into Emdros.

.SH OPTIONS
\fBpennimport\fR supports the following command-line switches:
.TP 6
.BI \-\-help
show help, then quit
.TP
.BI \-V\ ,\ \-\-version
show version, then quit
.TP
.BI \-b\ ,\ \-\-backend \ backend
set database backend to `backend'. Valid values are: For PostgreSQL:
"p", "pg", "postgres", and "postgresql". For MySQL: "m", "my", and
"mysql". For SQLite 2.X.X: "2", "s", "l", "lt", "sqlite", and
"sqlite2". For SQLite 3.X.X: "3", "s3", "lt3", and "sqlite3".
.TP
.BI \-d\ ,\ \-\-dbname \ dbname 
set database name. If used with -s, the string "CREATE DATABASE
'dbname' GO USE DATABASE 'dbname' GO" will be issued before the schema.  If used when importing, "USE DATABASE 'dbname' GO" will be issued before anything else.
.BI \-o\ ,\ \-\-output \ filename
dump to file filename. The default is "-", which means "standard
output".
.TP
.BI \-\-distinct\-nt\-otns
Emit nonterminals as distinct object types. The object types are named
after the 'node type'. Node types which are C identifiers are used as
is for the object type name.  Node types which have characters which
are outside the ranges A-Z, a-z, and 0-9, and which are not the
underscore, have these characters converted to "x" + the hex value of
the character.
.TP
.BI \-\-doc\-ids
Use separate INTEGER features for docids rather than the default ID_D
features.  This affects both schema output and object creation output.
If you use this feature when creating objects, you must also use it
when emitting the schema.
.TP
.BI \-s\ ,\ \-\-schema
Emit the schema. Note that this does not print distinct nonterminal
object types when --distinct-nt-otns is in effect.  Those object types
are created "on the fly".  This also means that the MQL, when
imported, may seem to fail, if only because the same object types are
created even though they have been created before.
.TP
.BI \-\-start-monad \ monad
The start monad to use. Must be >= 1.  The default is 1.
.TP
.BI \-\-start-id_d \ id_d
The start id_d to use. Must be >= 1.  The default is 1.
.TP

.SH OPERATION

\fBpennimport\fR reads corpus data in Penn Treebank format and
converts the data to MQL statements for later importing into Emdros.

The filenames given after the options on the command line are
interpreted as if each of them contains one Penn Treebank document,
each containing one or more trees.  If no filenames are given, the
input is read from stdin, and the whole of the stream is interpreted
as being one document.

If no \fB-o\fR switch is given, the output is printed on stdout.

If an error occurs, the string "FAILURE" or the string "ERROR" is
printed on stderr, along with an error message.

If no error occurs, a string of the form "SUCCESS: next_monad is X
next_id_d is Y" is printed on stderr, where X and Y are positive
integers denoting the next monad and the next id_d to be used by the
next invocation of the program, respectively.  This is useful if
you've got several directories' worth of documents to import.

Coreference links are assumed to be unique within a document, but not
across documents.  Thus you should exercise care if you choose to use
stdin as the input method -- all of the data on stdin will be treated
as a single document, and coreference links will be assumed to be
unique within the entire stream.  If this is not the case, then use
the method of putting files on the command line rather than using
stdin.

Support for importing the BLIPP corpus is implemented.  In particular,
the "hash" sign (number sign) as a delimiter for coreference relations
is supported.


.SH SCHEMA

The schema can be seen by giving the program \fB-s\fR switch, with an
optional \fB-d\fR switch.

Briefly, a "Document" corresponds to one file given on the command
line (or, in the case of using stdin, to the entire stream on stdin).

A "DocumentRoot" is one stand-alone tree.  Its "parent" feature points
 to the "Document" which is its parent.

A "Nonterminal" is a nonterminal in the tree which is not a
 DocumentRoot.  Its "parent" feature points to its parent.  Its
 "coref" feature gives a list of id_ds of other objects which are
 coreferent with this nonterminal.  Its "nttype" feature gives the
 first part of the nonterminal name.  Its "function" feature gives the
 rest of the nonterminal name, apart from any coreference pointer.
 For example, "NP-SUBJ-1036" would have "NP" for the "mytype" feature,
 "SUBJ" for the "function" feature, and the 1036 coreference link
 would be translated to the id_d(s) of the other object(s) with the
 same coreference link.

When the option --distinct-nt-otns is in effect, no Nonterminal
objects are emitted; instead, the nonterminals are divided into
distinct object types, whose names are based on the "nttype" feature
of the "Nonterminal" object type.  Also, these object types lack the
"nttype" feature, but have all of the features of the "Nonterminal"
object type otherwise.  See the --distinct-nt-otns option above under
OPTIONS for a description of how the nttype nonterminal types are
converted to object type names.

A "Token" is a terminal node in the tree.  Its "parent" feature points
to its parent.  Its "coref" feature gives a list of id_ds of other
objects which are coreferent with this terminal (only for traces).
Its "surface" feature gives the string associated with the terminal.
For traces, any coreference link will have been stripped off.  Its
"mytype" feature gives its part-of-speech tag, and its "function" is
defined analogously to "function" on "Nonterminal".


.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.BR 0 " Success"
.TP
.BR 1 " Wrong usage"
.TP
.BR 2 " Connection to backend server could not be established"
.TP
.BR 3 " An exception occurred (the type is printed on stderr)"
.TP
.BR 4 " Could not open file"
.TP
.BR 5 " Database error"
.TP
.BR 6 " Compiler error (internal error)
.SH AUTHORS
Written Ulrik Sandborg-Petersen (ulrikp@emdros.org).
