.\" Man page for ubimport
.\" Use the following command to view man page:
.\"
.\"  tbl ubimport.1 | nroff -man | less
.\"
.TH UBIMPORT 1 "January 20, 2007"
.SH NAME
ubimport \- A tool to convert bibles in Unbound Bible format to MQL for importing into Emdros
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBubimport\fR [ options ]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBubimport\fR is a command-line tool to convert bibles in Unbound
Bible format (http://unbound.biola.edu) to MQL, for easy importing
into Emdros.

.SH OPTIONS
\fBubimport\fR supports the following command-line switches:
.TP 6
.BI \-\-help
show help
.TP
.BI \-V\ ,\ \-\-version
show version
.TP
.BI \-d\ ,\ \-\-dbname \ dbname 
set database name to use at the top of the MQL.  If not set, the
"CREATE DATABASE ... USE DATABASE" incantation won't be issued.
.TP
.BI \-i\ ,\ \-\-input \ filename
read from file filename. This must be a bible in valid Unbound Bible
format.  The default filename is "-", which means "standard input".
.TP
.BI \-o\ ,\ \-\-output \ filename
dump to file filename. The default is "-", which means "standard output".
.TP
.BI \-b\ ,\ \-\-backend \ backend
set database backend to `backend'. Valid values are: For PostgreSQL:
"p", "pg", "postgres", and "postgresql". For MySQL: "m", "my", and
"mysql". For SQLite 2.X.X: "2", "s", "l", "lt", "sqlite", and
"sqlite2". For SQLite 3.X.X: "3", "s3", "lt3", and "sqlite3".


.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
.BR 0 " Success"
.TP
.BR 1 " Wrong usage"
.TP
.BR 2 " Connection to backend server could not be established"
.TP
.BR 3 " An exception occurred (the type is printed on stderr)"
.TP
.BR 4 " Could not open file"
.TP
.BR 5 " Database error"
.TP
.BR 6 " Compiler error (internal error)
.SH AUTHORS
Copyright
.Cr
2001-2006 by Ulrik Petersen (ulrikp@users.sourceforge.net).  Note that
this software is distributed under the GNU GPL.  See the sources for
details.
